---
title: Module 4 Mini-Project Gallery & Discussion
authors: Jon Stapleton & Eva Anderson
date: 4/23/2022
type: discussion
---

<!-- ::youtube[A video explaining the mini-project gallery and discussion prompt]{#oXmKJ_tYg34} -->

# Module 4 Mini-Project Gallery & Discussion

Respond to this discussion board with a **screenshot of the output of your program** you created for the *Module 4 Mini-Project* (just the visual you created, don't worry about including code in your screenshot).

Then, in the same post, pick **two of the reflective questions below** to respond to:

"If" statements are an incredibly important and ubiquitous part of programming. They appear in almost every programming language, and the behavior they create in computers is really common. The stakes of our Processing programs are pretty low, but that isn't always true with other kinds of software. Some examples include:

* Automated phone call programs, like the ones that call home when students are marked absent from a certain number of classes.
* Resume filters, which automatically reject job applications based on a person's responses to application questions.
* Government aid programs, which automatically determine people's eligibility for aid based on form responses.

1. Consider the different automated systems you have interacted with. Speculate about the kind of "if" statement it might use. What kind of data does it check?
2. What are the limitations of using conditional programming instead of human reasoning to make decisions?
3. Some decisions are more important and more impactful than others. What are the risks of programming important decisions instead of having a person make them?

You can read more about this topic in *[Critically Conscious Computing](https://criticallyconsciouscomputing.org/#/)*, a book about computer science education that focuses on the ways computing systematically empowers and disempowers people. Check it out!

We'd love to use your work as an example in future trainings; please leave a note on this discussion board post if you are okay with us using your code, images of your program output, or the text of your reflections anonymously in future trainings.
