---
title: Data Types & Variables
authors: Eva Anderson & Jon Stapleton
date: 4/11/2022
type: page
---

::youtube[A video tutorial covering data types in Java]{#oXmKJ_tYg34}

# Data Types & Variables

Lorem ipsum TODO:

## Data Types

In the last module, we called on methods to perform tasks and we passed values to those methods. Some were numeric values like 157, 227, and 250, and some were text values like "This is my first program!"  In Java, we have to pay close attention to these different data types. Java has 8 primitive data types and countless object types. Primitives and objects are stored differently in memory and are used differently in a program.

### Primitives

Java has eight different *primitive data types*, each representing a different basic type of value taking up a different amount of memory in your program. You can view all eight primitive types by visiting this link, but we will only be using the primitives `float` and `int` in our programs (at least for now). 

| Data Type | Examples | Description | Range of Values |
| --------- | -------- | ----------- | --------------- |
| `float`   | 3.5, 4.0, 9, -7.888 | single-precision floating point decimal value | ± 3.4 E+38 to 1.4 E-45 |
| `int`     | -2, 0, 1, 3, 56789 | integer value | -2,147,483,648 to 2,147,483,647 |

*Table. Two Java Primitive Types*

### Objects

An object type is a conglomeration of any number of primitives and/or other object data types. Java and Processing provide some objects and you can also create your own. In this course, we will not be creating our own objects and will only be using one Java object type: `String`.

A `String` value is a reference type that represents a collection of primitive characters, for example, `"This is my first program!"` The quotation marks are not stored as data, but delineate where the `String` begins and ends.

## Variables

Data types are important in Java because they help the computer understand what kind of data you are using in your program, and how much memory to allocate to the execution of your set of coded instructions. Data types are particularly important if you want your program to instruct the computer to store information for later use by creating and managing *variables*. 

Variables are like containers that hold information. Sometimes variables are necessary to solve a particular problem, and sometimes programmers use them as a style preference to make code more readable. Here is how you create variables in Java:

```java
type name; // declare the name and type of the container
name = value; // store a value in the container
```

or you can combine those two statements into one like so:

```java
type name = value; // declare the type (size) and name of the the container, and then store an initial value
```

...where `type` is a valid primitive or object data type, `name` is a unique name for the variable, and `value` is the data to be stored in the variable. The equal sign (`=`) is called the *assignment operator*, since it is used to assign values to variables. It is helpful to read the equal sign as "gets the value". Here are some examples:

```java
int number;  // create an integer container    	
number = 73; // store the value 73 in the container called "number"
float taxRate = 6.5; // the "float" container called "taxRate" gets the value 6.5
String name = "Code VA"; // the "String" container called "name" gets the value "Code VA"
```

Once you declare the `type` for a variable once, the program can use and modify the data inside the variable  multiple times without restating its type. Variables can only hold one value at a time. For the following example, the computer would only display `35` in the console area:

```java
float total; // declare ‘total’ as a floating point variable
total = 0;   // total gets the value 0
total = 35;  // total gets the value 35 (replaces the 0)
print(total); // display the value in total
```

### Naming Variables

When you declare a variable, you should choose a name or identifier that is descriptive of the data it holds. It should also follow the following rules and guidelines:

* can contain letters, numbers, and underscore (_), but cannot begin with a number
* cannot include special characters or spaces
* cannot be a Java reserved word (for example all the primitive data types are reserved words)
* use lowercase and camel case, for example, `taxRate` and `canDrive`
* must be unique within the block of code. (For now, our entire program represents one block of code, but we will see later how we can create different blocks of code within one program)

Examine the variable names below. Which names do not follow the rules and guidelines stated above? After you identify invalid names, click reveal to check your answer (hint: try pasting these lines of code into your Processing editor to see which variables cause an error message):

```java
int numMinutes;
int hours;
String phone2;
float $amount;
float 2xradius;
float total_time;
int double;
String first name;
int x;
```

:::collapse{title="Reveal Answers"}
```java
int numMinutes;
int hours;
String phone2;
float $amount;		// invalid - no special characters allowed except underscore (_)
float 2xradius;		// invalid - name cannot begin with a number
float total_time;
int double;		// invalid - double is a reserved word
String first name;	// invalid - no spaces allowed
int x;
```
:::

### Using Variables

Once you create a variable, the program can reference that variable name anywhere that allows that type of data. For example, in the *Monochrome Tree Program*, we could replace:

```java
print("This is my first program");
```

with:

```java
String message = "This is my first program";
print(message);
```

Notice that `message` is not surrounded by quotation marks because it represents a variable name. The Processing environment helps us to distinguish string literals from variable names by color-coding them differently. 

Here is another example of using variables. We can can replace:

```java
textSize(32);
```
with:

```java
float num = 32;
textSize(num);
```

When you use a variable as a parameter value, like `num` and `message` in the code snippets above, Java will only accept the variable if its type matches the method’s expected type. The Processing reference gives us the expected parameter types for methods, but the Java compiler will also flag a type mismatch if you mistakenly use an unexpected type of variable.

For example, the `textSize` method expects a `float` value. Java interprets a `String` variable as text, even if it holds numbers; the compiler will flag an error in the following code as a result:

```java
String val = "32";
textSize(val);  // error - type mismatch
```

### Variable Practice

Using the *Monochrome Tree Program* from module 1 (see below), create new `String`, `float`, and `int` variables, and pass them as arguments to some of the methods. Use descriptive variable names and practice good debugging skills by creating and testing one variable before adding another. 

```java
// Monochrome Tree Program
      
// create the window
size(640, 480);
noStroke();
background(250); // Draw a background 

// title
textSize(32);
fill(0); // set text color
text("Help the planet. Plant a tree!", 50, 50);
  
// tree
fill(75); // set shape color  
rect(310, 360, 20, 100);   
fill(200); 
circle(320, 350, 100);

print("This is my first program!");
```
