---
title: Generating Random Value Variables
authors: Eva Anderson & Jon Stapleton
date: 4/11/2022
type: page
---

::youtube[A video tutorial covering the color() and random() methods in Processing]{#oXmKJ_tYg34}

# Generating Random Value Variables

In this module, you'll learn how to generate, store, and make use of random numbers in your Processing programs. Randomization provides some interesting ways to make your programs more unpredictable, allowing the program to produce surprising results that vary each time you run it. Randomization requires that you use variables to store and recall the random number returned by the `random()` method, very much in the same way that you used variables to store the integers produced by the `color()` method earlier.

## The `random()` Method

Create a new program in Processing and run the following code multiple times to see its output:

```java
// create the window
size(640, 480);
noStroke();
background(0); // Draw a background 

// draw
float r = random(150);        
float t = random(150);     
float u = random(150); 
square(50, 200, r);
square(200, 200, t);
square(350, 200, u);
```

What do you notice about the squares each time you run the program?

Like the `color` method, the `random` method you see in the code above returns a value as part of its task. It directs the computer to generate a random `float` value, and then returns that random `float` value so you can use it later on in your program to simulate coin flips, dice rolls, and events that occur with certain probabilities. Using `random` to place shapes in random locations, or to give shapes random sizes, can make a picture look more realistic (for example, if you were to display a forest you might use random values for the height of the "trees" to create variation, like in a real forest). In a game, programmers might use random numbers to trigger special events.

### Using the `random()` Method

The parameters for the `random` method are floating point numbers that specify the range of random values. If you pass one parameter, the range is between `[0, paramvalue)` (the `[` symbol is set notation, and indicates that `0` is included in the range of possible values, but parmvalue is not). All values in between are included also. If you pass two parameters, the range is between `[parmvalue1, parmvalue2)`. Here are some code examples with a comment that specifies the range of random values the method might generate:

```java
float r = random(150);        // r gets random float between 0 and 150, not including 150
float t = random(5, 15);     // t gets random float between 5 and 15, not including 15
float u = random(75.5, 111.2); // u gets random float between 75.5 and 111.2, not including 111.2
```

Each time you call the `random` method, it produces a different random number. A good random number generator will return a wide range of values before returning repeats.

### Practice with `random()`

> Update the new *Color Tree Program* from the last page (copied below) so the circle representing the "branches" of the tree gets a random radius between 25 and 75. Run the program several times. Was this a good range of values for the tree? How might you ensure a range of random values for a shape is reasonable? Unfold the collapsible section below to reveal an example:

:::collapse{title="Reveal Example"}
```java
// Color Tree Program

// colors
int blue = color(157, 227, 250);  // (red, green, blue) or (R, G, B)
int green = color(46, 179, 93);
int brown = color(92, 81, 59);
int branchRadius = random(25, 75); // generate a random number & store it
    
// create the window
size(640, 480);
noStroke();
background(blue); // Draw a background 

// title
textSize(32);
fill(0); // set text color
text("Help the planet. Plant a tree!", 50, 50);

// tree
fill(brown); // set shape color  
rect(310, 360, 20, 100);   
fill(green); 
circle(320, 350, branchRadius); // recall the random number
```
:::

## Typecasting

There are times that you may want a random `int` value instead of a `float` value. For example, if you are writing code to simulate a dice roll, you would only want random integers `1` through `6`, not all the decimal values in between. Using a technique called *typecasting*, we can truncate or remove the decimal portion from a floating point number to produce an `int` value. It is important to recognize that truncating a floating point simply removes the decimal portion, it does not round. 

Here is an example of using typecasting on floating point values:

```java
float num = 3.57;
int noDecimal = (int) num;  // typecasting example
println(num);               // displays 3.57 (typecasting does not change the original variable)
println(noDecimal);         // displays 3
```

Here is an example that simulates a random dice roll:

```java
float rand = random(1, 7);
int diceRoll = (int) rand;
```

> This program generates a random value between 1 and 6. Do you know why the code uses `7` instead of `6`? Unfold the collapsible section below to see an explanation.

:::collapse{title="Reveal Explanation"}
The `random(1, 7)` method produces a `float` value in the range `[1, 7)`. This means that the minimum possible value of `rand` is `1.0` and the maximum is close to `6.99`.

This `float value isn't right; `6.99` is too high (and it's a decimal, not a whole number like a die roll would be). However, when the program casts `rand` as an `(int)` value, the computer *truncates* the `float` value to produce an `int`, discarding the extra decimal values. This means that even if `random(1, 7)` produces `6.99`, the code will discard the extra `0.99` resulting in `diceRoll` containing a value of either `1`, `2`, `3`, `4`, `5`, or `6`.
:::

### Dice Roll Practice (Optional)

> If you have a 6-sided dice at home, roll one 10 times and record the values. Then, create a new program based on the following code that "rolls the dice" 10 times (the example below only does 2 rolls). After you're done, run the code to test the random method for simulating a dice roll. How did the random method compare? Do you think it is a good random number generator?

```java
int diceRoll = (int) random(1,7);
print("roll 1 is ");
println(diceRoll);

diceRoll = (int) random(1,7);
print("roll 2 is ");
println(diceRoll);

// Add additional rolls here
```

**Reminder:** A challenging part of coding is managing program files. Take the time now to save the programs you’ve just created with descriptive filenames so you can easily reference them later. A file named random_diceroll will be more helpful to you in the future, than one that is named sketch_220317a.
