---
title: Module 2 Mini-Project Gallery & Discussion
authors: Eva Anderson & Jon Stapleton
date: 3/25/2022
type: discussion
---

<!-- ::youtube[A video explaining the discussion prompt]{#oXmKJ_tYg34} -->

# Module 2 Mini-Project Discussion

Respond to this discussion board with a screenshot of the output of the program that you created for the *Module 2 Mini-Project* (just the visual you created, don't worry about including code in your screenshot).

Then, in the same post, pick **two** of the reflective questions below to respond to:

1. Variables are sometimes a difficult topic for beginning coders--what challenges did you encounter learning about them, or what challenges can you imagine students running into as they learn about them for the first time?
2. What differences do you notice when you compare reading code *without* variables to reading code that *includes* them? Is one more difficult than the other? Why or why not?
3. Reflect on your experience with module 1 and module 2; which of the below skills comes easiest for you? Which one contributes the most to your learning? Explain your answer.

* Debugging
* Code tracing
* Recalling & using correct terminology
* Tinkering with code examples
* Using the Processing Reference materials

We'd love to use your work as an example in future trainings; please leave a note on this discussion board post if you are okay with us using your code, images of your program output, or the text of your reflections anonymously in future trainings.