---
title: Inheritance
author: Jon Stapleton
date: 12/13/2022
type: page
---

# Inheritance

Classes and objects are a powerful way of **modeling** relationships among ideas and constructs in your programs. One way of further representing relationships among classes is through **inheritance**, where you create classes that build on other classes. Let's dive in!

## Setting the Stage

Imagine that you would like to create a `Falling` object that will fall and stop on the bottom edge of the screen. Your program could look something like this:

:::code-example{src="TODO:" tabs}
::name[Main]
```java
Falling obj;
void setup() {
    obj = new Falling(50, 25);
}
void draw() {
    obj.update();
    obj.display();
}
```

::name[Falling]
```java
class Falling {
    // attributes
    float x = 0;
    float y = 0;

    // constructor
    Falling(float x, float y) {
        this.x = x;
        this.y = y;
    }
    void update() {
        if (this.y < 400) {
            this.y = this.y - 3;
        }
    }
    void display() {
        rect(this.x - 25, this.y - 25, 50, 50);
    }
}
```
:::

This works great! You could even create several instances of the `Falling` class and have a bunch of falling rectangles in your sketch. But, what if you wanted a couple of different *kinds* of `Falling` objects? For example, you might want some circles in addition to the rectangles (I guess you might not want that as well, but for explanatory purposes you should pretend you want to make that change here). All the rest of the `Falling` class should remain the same for the "falling circle" object except for the `update()` method--instead of `rect`, you would want to use `circ`.

Here's what the main program should look like to implement this program:

```java
Falling obj;
FallCirc c;

void setup() {
    obj = new Falling(25, 50);
    c = new FallCirc(10, 30);
}
void draw() {
    obj.update();
    c.update();

    obj.display();
    c.display();
}
```

Now you *could* just write a whole new `FallCirc` class from scratch copying most of the code from `Falling`, but you can also create a **subclass** of `Falling`, creating the `FallCirc` class *based on* the `Falling` class. Here's what that looks like:

:::code-example{src="TODO:" tabs}
::name[FallCirc]
```java
class FallCirc extends Falling {
    FallCirc(float x, float y) {
        super(x, y); // call the Falling constructor
    }
    void draw() {
        circ(this.x, this.y, 25);
    }
}
```

::name[Falling]
```java
class Falling {
    // attributes
    float x = 0;
    float y = 0;

    // constructor
    Falling(float x, float y) {
        this.x = x;
        this.y = y;
    }
    void update() {
        if (this.y < 400) {
            this.y = this.y - 3;
        }
    }
    void display() {
        rect(this.x - 25, this.y - 25, 50, 50);
    }
}
```

::name[Main]
```java
Falling obj;
FallCirc c;

void setup() {
    obj = new Falling(25, 50);
    c = new FallCirc(10, 30);
}
void draw() {
    obj.update();
    c.update();

    obj.display();
    c.display();
}
```
:::

You might be confused by this--how can the computer call the `update()` method on the `FallCirc` object `c`? There's no definition for that method in the `FallCirc` class, so shoudn't the computer throw an error? The answer lies in the first line of code in the `FallCirc` tab--`class FallCirc extends Falling`. The `extends` keyword indicates to the Java compiler that `FallCirc` is a **subclass** of `Falling`. This means that `FallCirc` **inherits** all of the attributes and methods of the `Falling` class, and we do not have to declare them explicitly in the `FallCirc` class in order to use them.

Subclassing is the reason for the strange constructor in the example, as well:

```java
FallCirc(float x, float y) {
    super(x, y);
}
```

The `super()` method is a special, reserved method that invokes the constructor of the "parent" class of a subclass (in this case the parent class being `Falling`). By calling the `super(x, y)` method, the computer will construct `FallCirc` objects as if they were `Falling` objects.

## Overriding & Polymorphism

The final interesting piece of this example is the `display()` method. If the `FallCirc` class has inherited the attributes (`x` and `y`) and all the methods (`void display()` and `void draw()`) from `Falling` *and* the code provides a second `void display()` method in the `FallCirc` class definition, how does the computer know which `void display()` method to call when it runs `c.display()`?

Providing a new subclass definition for a method that already has a definition in the superclass is called **overriding**. The computer will use the new `void display()` method for `FallCirc` objects, but will "fall back" to the original `void display()` method for `Falling` objects. Overriding methods (and adding new methods not present in the superclass) is called **polymorphism**--the idea that instances of a superclass can be different from one another, but sharing important pieces across subclasses.

Polymorphism allows us to do some cool things. For example, you can store `FallCirc` and `Falling` objects in the same array:

```java
Falling[] objs = {
    new Falling(30, 20),
    new FallCirc(50, 10)
};
```

Normally, Java would be upset about this. You can't for example, store `int` and `float` data in the same array. However, because `FallCirc` is a subclass of `Falling`, Java knows that it's safe to treat them as the same class!

---