---
title: General Discussion
authors: Jon Stapleton
date: 5/28/2022
type: discussion
---

# General Discussion Board

This discussion board is designed to be an open forum for participants to ask questions, provide resources, or request support! Post here if you need someone to explain a concept, provide support in completing a course element, or if you have trouble accessing resources linked in the course (session recordings, etc.).

## Instructions & Norms

Feel free to post whatever you like! Keep the following norms in mind. If you post something that falls outside of what is acceptable in a CodeVA professional learning setting, your post will be removed and you'll receive a follow-up email from a CodeVA facilitator. Please reach out to **jonstapleton@codevirginia.org** if you have any questions or concerns:

* Always be constructive, kind, and supportive in your comments on this discussion board. If you need CodeVA to ameliorate an issue, please reach out to a facilitator via email.
* Do not post private information on this discussion board--all posts and replies are public, and while we will do our best to remove sensitive information promptly, you are responsible for sharing appropriate information in this space. If you need to communicate with CodeVA in a private, secure way, please reach out to a facilitator via email or Canvas direct message.
* Any racist, misogynistic, ableist, transphobic, or other hostile messages will be promptly removed from the discussion board. Posting these kinds of messages is grounds for removal from the Praxis Pilot course.