---
title: Encoding Gallery & Discussion Board
author: Jon Stapleton
date: 4/6/2022
type: discussion
---

<!-- ::youtube[A video explaining the discussion board prompt]{#TODO:} -->

# Encoding Gallery & Discussion Board

Create a post on the discussion board with the binary for your encoded and encryptd image from the previous assignment. Include written instructions for how to decrypt your image so others can practice decrypting and decoding binary data.

Then, in the same post, respond to the following questions:

1. Binary, encryption, and encoding are an important part of many sets of computer science standards. If you teach this content in your classes already, what strategies, curricula, or activities do you use? If this content is new to you, what strategies might you use if you end up needing to teach it in the future?
2. Converting between base systems *used* to be a big part of the computer science Advanced Placement exams, but it has since been de-emphasized. If you've taught this content to students before, what were some of the strategies that worked well for you? If you haven't taught this content before, why do you imagine different CS stakeholders have chosen to de-emphasize these skills & understandings?

Optionally, decode one other person's encrypted image using a sheet of graph paper following the instructions included with their post. Reply to their post with a screenshot of their image, and any responses you might have to their reflections.

*Note: If you have chosen to simply review this module rather than completing the activities, please feel free to respond to the discussion questions without providing the project materials from the assignment.*