---
title: Networking Announcement
authors: Jon Stapleton
date: 6/13/2022
type: announcement
---

Hello everyone!

I hope you all are having a smooth and fulfilling end of the school year. We have released a large amount of content this week, and we have some changes to the course syllabus and some of the course design that we would like to share with you! Please review the items below, and let us know if you have any questions!

## 1. New Optional "Processing" Programming Modules

We recognize that we have a broad range of peope participating in this pilot, and each person brings with them a unique set of prior skills and knowledge. Some of you are beginners with very little computer science training or experience, and some of you are experienced CS educators with years of expertise. We are committed to support each and every one of you as best as we can as you pursue endorsement; to those ends, we've made some additions to our Praxis Pilot curriculum which warrant some explanation.

If you visit the *Modules* page in Canvas, you can see we've added several new sets of modules about the **Processing coding environment.** These modules are intended to give folks who are brand new to coding a strong set of foundational skills to build off of as you prepare for the Praxis exam. These modules are part of CodeVA's *Programming Using Java* professional learning curriculum, and we thought it would be appropriate to make them available here for people who want to start off their coding journey with some practical, beginner-oriented learning experiences. If this sounds like you, we encourage you to work through the Processing modules during the Praxis Pilot!

## 2. Optional Sequences of Modules

Given that you all have such a diverse set of needs, we are interested in providing you with a robust set of options to help you prepare for the Praxis exam and for your CS teaching careers after this pilot program. Toward these ends, we have come up with two different sequences of course content that you can follow as you fill your gaps in knowledge:

[novice sequence]

[expert sequence]

You can choose which sequence fits your needs best, or mix-and-match to address any gaps you think you may have in your CS knowledge, and work through the modules with the relevant suggested due dates in mind. These details are available in the *Syllabus* in Canvas, which we have updated to reflect these changes.

**Don't forget that we also need your insights as a consultant and reviewer for this course! No matter what sequence of content you choose to follow, please be sure to read each module in its entirety and complete the module feedback assignment, even if you don't need to complete the activities in the module to prepare for the test**.

## 3. Networking & the Internet Session Pre-Work

We are so excited to see you again this weekend for our Networking & the Internet synchronous session! Please be sure to complete the *Pre-Work* section of the *Networking & the Internet* module before Saturday's session!

---

Thank you again for all of your work to help us test and evaluate this pilot program! Please be in touch if you have any questions or concerns this week; I'm more than happy to provide additional information if needed!

Best Wishes,
Jon Stapleton