---
title: The Internet
authors: Jon Stapleton
date: 6/13/2022
type: page
---

# The Internet

Networks are made up of physical components (routers, clients, servers, access points, etc.) and software components (protocols--rules for how to interpret the data on the network). The *physical* part of networks is just binary data traveling over wires or over the airwaves; the data is only *meaningful* if the computing devices on the network know how to interpret the data. Binary is the raw information, but *protocols* are what computing devices use to interpret that binary information and display the text, images, video, and other content we download to our computers over computing networks.

The **Internet**, or the "world-wide Web" (just "Web" for short) is a very large, complex network with *well-defined rules for how to use it*. Without these common rules that everyone follows, no one would be able to interpret the data coming from the Web! Everyone would have their own set of protocols, and you would only be able to communicate with people who agreed to your special set of interpretation rules. The reason we can communicate with all kinds of people on the internet, even people who we have never met, is because of the **protocols** that govern how we interpret the data on the internet in the first place. The "internet" as we know it isn't really a physical thing you can touch; it isn't even software running on your computer. It's an *idea*, a set of rules for communication.

> The videos below go into detail about how the internet works, building on the physical network infrastructure that you already know about. These videos are part of Code.org's free AP Computer Science Principles curriculum.

## Hardware Components of the Internet

::youtube[A video from Code.org about the physical components of the internet]{#ZhEf7e4kopM}

## IP Addressing & DNS

::youtube[A video from Code.org about IP addressing and the domain name system (DNS)]{#5o8CwafCxnU}

## Transport Control Protocol (TCP)

::youtube[A video from Code.org about the transport control protocol (TCP) & packets]{#AYdF7b3nMto}

## HTML & HTTPS

::youtube[A video from Code.org about HTTP and HTML on the internet]{#kBXQZMmiA4s}