---
title: Networks & the Internet Pre-Work Discussion
authors: Jon Stapleton
date: 6/14/2022
type: discussion
---

# Networks & the Internet Pre-Work Discussion

Teaching about networking, the internet, and the ways that computing devices work together can be kind of technical, dry, and irrelevant to students' lives, goals, interests, and desires. However, engaging with these kinds of technologies can also be empowering, and understanding the basics can help students see the technologies and power structures *behind* what can sometimes feel like internet "magic".

Check out the list of topics below, which take the form of questions for students and teachers to investigate. Then, write a response to the following questions:

1. Which of these topics seems like it would connect with students in your school or community the most? Why?
2. Can you think of another similar question that has to do with networks and the internet that you might be interested in investigating and exploring with students in your classes?

## Topics for Inquiry Into Networking and the Internet

* **What do cloud storage providers do with your data, and what limitations should we put in place?** Many companies use the data provided by customers to support other parts of their business outside of their cloud services. Data is a valuable asset, and some companies fail to use data responsibly. What sorts of things do cloud service providers like Amazon, Google, Microsoft, and Apple do with your data, and what rules should we put in place to make sure they can't abuse the trust of their customers?
* **What rules would you put in place to improve the internet?** The protocols that govern how the internet works have a lot to do with how to interpret the binary information that travels on the network, but the internet protocol doesn't have anything to say about what sort of data is *allowed* to travel, or how people should communicate with one another using the internet. What sorts of problems do people experience online? Would you create rules to solve these problems? Why or why not?
* **What are some uses for locally-maintained networks?** The internet is very powerful, but it isn't accessible to everyone. It can be expensive to pay for access to the internet, and some places around the world don't have service providers at all. However, you can still build your own wide area network using routers and switches. What sorts of tasks might a locally-maintained network be good for? Can you think of a situation in which a locally-maintained network might be *better* than connecting to the internet?
* **Not everyone has equal access to the internet; why?** The "digital divide" is a big problem for lots of people. What are the factors that lead to unequal access to the internet? What would you do to address them?