---
title: Summative Project Discussion
authors: Jon Stapleton & Eva Anderson
date: 4/20/2022
type: discussion
---

::youtube[A video explaining the summative project discussion board prompt]{#oXmKJ_tYg34}

# Summative Project Discussion & Gallery

Respond to this discussion board with a screen recording of the program that you created for the *Summative Project*.

Then, in the same post, respond to the following reflective questions:

1. What did you learn, if anything, during these modules?
2. Many students choose to learn to code on their own using materials from online creators or communities as scaffolds. Have you learned this way before? How might this "informal" or "nonformal" method of learning to code differ from the way you've learned to code in these modules? What are some pros and cons of "formal" coding education and "informal" coding education?
3. Many communities and schools in Virginia are failing to provide equitable coding opportunities to all students. White and Asian male students are overrepresented in many coding classes across the K-12 spectrum (especially in the Java AP exam). Now that you know how to code, what strategies do you think might be effective toward broadening participation in computing and/or coding education opportunities at your school?
4. Many people find the idea of learning to code to be intimidating. They believe that the knowledge required to code is difficult to acquire, and many people believe they cannot learn to code at all. Why do you think this is? What barriers are in place which reinforce this mindset, and what strategies might teachers use to make coding education feel more accessible to more people?

We'd love to use your work as an example for future participants; please leave a note on this discussion board post if you are okay with us using your code, images of your program output, or the text of your reflections anonymously in future training sessions or CodeVA materials.
